How do you feel when you miss a meal or have an eaten for some time?
You know for many it affects their mood
their ability to concentrate
Sometimes their ability to even think straight
But what if that hunger was beyond our control?
Or prolonged to the point where we had no other choice but to be hungry?
Well, that was the situation the Apostle Paul found himself in as he engaged in
his ministry. For example, a second Corinthians 1127 Paul said that he was in hunger and thirst
and frequently without food. This likely occurred while Paul was traveling through
desolate regions or hot desert areas. At times he may have been hungry and thirsty because
of being dependent on strangers or on whatever provisions he could obtain through his own
labors and unfamiliar surroundings. Paul also lived during the time of a great famine,
a famine which lasted more than three years and caused oppressive poverty in Judea and Jerusalem.
But despite facing all these times without food, it's interesting to note the attitude of the
Apostle Paul. A second Corinthians chapter 6 verse 10, he describes himself in his fellow
Christians as sorrowing but ever rejoicing. So Paul acknowledged that difficult times could
bring a measure of sorrow and distress. But how was he able to rejoice? To have this inner joy
despite his hunger? Well, notice his answer. Turn with me in your Bibles, please, to the book of
Philippians. And we're going to read Philippians chapter 4 verses 11 through 13. Paul says,
not that I am saying this because I am in need, but I have learned to be self-sufficient
regardless of my circumstances. I know how to be low on provisions and how to have an abundance.
In everything and in all circumstances, I have learned the secret of both how to be full
and how to hunger, both how to have an abundance and how to do without. For all things I have
the strength through the one who gives me power. Did you note in verse 12, Paul speaks of learning
the secret of both how to be full and how to hunger. This secret involves relying on Jehovah
for life's necessities and being satisfied with whatever he provides. And Paul certainly did that.
He learned a trade to support himself so as not to be a burden to others.
He was fully occupied with his ministry, so he had few material possessions,
but he was grateful for the brotherhood. He was appreciative of what those brothers were able
to provide what he needed. Paul learned through each of these experiences. And as he saw,
Jehovah's hand in his life, it became apparent to him that no matter what his circumstances were,
he had to look to Jehovah to satisfy his needs. Did you notice verse 13,
Jehovah sustained Paul. He gave him power. So when Paul did face those adverse circumstances,
he was still able to be content, maintain inner joy, and carry out his ministry.
Well, what can you and I learn from Paul's example? It may be that we too might face hunger for a
variety of reasons. For example, food shortages. This could result from civil unrest or an economic
crisis. World events today have caused many to lose their jobs around the world, including our
brothers. So a personal economic setback may force us to live on less. Hunger can also result
from persecution. When many of our brothers were put in Nazi concentration camps,
depriving them of adequate food was one of the diabolical methods used in an effort to break
their integrity. And even when it comes to theocratic pursuits, some who move to serve with the
need is greater, are forced to make adjustments and must learn to be content with less.
So really, in any number of situations, you and I could experience a lack of food or even hunger.
And that can make us feel anxious and distressed. But the antidote is trust and reliance on Jehovah.
You know, when we do that, it helps us to remain calm and to take things one day at a time.
When inflation hit in his country, one father said, my dearly prayer was simply that God would give
us today our bread for this day in order for us to survive. We must also be grateful with whatever
Jehovah provides. When that same father went to the food line to purchase items,
he said, one time, the only thing they had left was something he didn't like. Oh, what did he do?
He said, I didn't like it, but it was food. So that's what we ate that night.
And he was grateful to Jehovah for providing it. You know, perhaps right now, we may be in a
position where we only eat what we like. But if circumstances change, could we adjust and still be
grateful? Isn't it reassuring that we are cared for by a God who gives us what we need?
And of course, it is important that we utilize the resources Jehovah provides.
We'd like you to watch the following video. And as you do, note which provisions helped our
sister to rejoice, despite experiencing hunger. Well, here in Venezuela, long before the crisis,
there weren't so many financial problems like we have today. We could go to the stores, we could
buy the amount of food we wanted, and life was peaceful. For us, the situation started to get really
bad five years ago. It was hard to get any food at all, even basic items. When it came time to buy
something, well, it was all gone. There were two elders that I can say were checking on me almost
daily, always asking how much food I needed. When I prepared it and served it, my main concern was
that my children would get enough. I always gave them more food. Even though my youngest boy would ask,
Mommy, is that what you're going to eat? I would tell him, yes, dear, I'm fine with this.
Then he would say, I don't think so. I would think, I can handle this, but the amount that I was eating
just wasn't enough for my body. One Sunday morning during the meeting, I wasn't feeling very well.
But thanks to Jehovah, my daughter was nearby. When I came to, she said, Mom, you fainted three times.
I said, that can't be. So the brothers immediately took me to the doctor. I was diagnosed as having
severe malnutrition. The brothers began a plan of action. They brought food that was already prepared,
and in fact, they would sit by me until I finished my food. I have not yet fully recovered my
body weight, because I was a little heavier. But health wise, I have felt very well. The elders
were always looking after me. That boosted my energy, and definitely I never lost my joy.
And it's all thanks to Jehovah. Thanks to him, because he is the one who sustains me.
He clothes me, he feeds me, and he gives me great friends. That is what Jehovah gives me.
Did you notice the provisions that helped our sister? First, her relationship with Jehovah.
She saw the importance of staying close to him and regularly attending her meetings.
And then, of course, the brotherhood. Wasn't it comforting to see how attentive the elders were,
making daily checks on her, providing food for her and her family, and even making sure she ate
enough as well? Well, it's these same provisions, maintaining our relationship with Jehovah,
receiving relief from the brotherhood, as well as holding fast to our hope that can help us to
rejoice, despite any periods of hunger. We agree. We are fully convinced of what Paul said in
Philippians 412, Jehovah can and does provide life's necessities in all circumstances.
When facing hunger, it is natural to be concerned for our own welfare and that of our loved ones.
And yet, as we've seen, it is possible to rejoice. Despite any hunger, we may experience.
But the key, learn the secret. Everyone likes to be in on a secret. And Jehovah is more than
happy to reveal this one to us. But we must rely on him and see how he acts in our behalf.
How pleased Jehovah must be when his servants remain loyal and joyful, trusting that he will
never abandon them. Rather, Robert Lucioni, a helper to the publishing committee, will now present
the next talk of the symposium. We can rejoice, despite nakedness.